Hey everyone and and welcome to Hello
Interviews where we get a chance to talk
with some interesting personalities and
experts in in the industry. I've noted
that uh in all of our discussions so far
on this channel, we haven't really
covered manager interviews in specific.
So I thought it'd be great chance to
bring on Gilad to talk about these tough
loops. Gilad is a former EM from Amazon
and and Meta. He's actually coached
hundreds of managers on how to succeed
in interviews and I really can't think
of anyone who uh would be better to go
deep with. So, welcome to the channel,
Gillad. Yeah, happy to be here.
Fantastic. What would you say
distinguishes a great people management
interview from a mediocre one? like when
you are talking with various candidate
what stands out from those those
managers who are you know really have
their stuff together versus someone who
maybe doesn't have that experience or
wouldn't make the the cut. Yeah, I think
that that's a a great question. So I'll
go in a really quick tangent and then
I'll tie to you know concrete and
specific tips that uh viewers can use.
Perfect. And it all starts with what is
management really about? What is the
manager's job? Like what is it really
when you get down to it? And there's a
lot of you know stuff in the literature
but in Silicon Valley you know there's
basically Andy Grove's framing which is
a manager's output is the output of the
organization under their responsibility
and this framing is of course correct. I
think there is a framing that is more
useful especially in the context of an
interview and my framing here is that a
manager's job is to create a positive
and sustainable change in the
performance of the organization. Put
another way the current output of the
organization is not really interesting.
What is interesting is how you as the
manager create a change in the
performance of the organization. So like
a lift or a delta. Is that kind of what
you're getting at? Exactly. Exactly.
Like the derivative, the delta, the
change.
And if we apply this lens to various
manager interview questions, I think it
really distinguishes between mediocre
and really great engineering managers.
We can run through a couple of examples
like tell me about a time you helped an
engineer grow in their career. And most
managers would lean towards a story
where they helped promote one of their
engineers. I'll start with an analogy
here which is think about those weight
loss commercials you may have seen with
a before and an after picture. There's a
clear transformation. So in this analogy
if we have a person who wants to lose
weight and they're exercising, they're
tracking their calories, they're doing
great, and then you step in and say,
"Hey, you should drink some lemon juice
twice a day." And then afterwards you go
and show the before and after, it's not
really impressive. you know the person
would have lost weight anyways in the
promotion story you know most engineers
who are up for promotion are motivated
they're skilled they're doing great
often they're self-learners and as an
interviewer when you tell me this story
what I'm looking for is how did you
contribute here would this person have
been promoted just as quickly without
you and so this is an example of going
into the interview with the framing of
creating change and framing your story
around where you fit in How did you have
those deep conversations with a person?
Really help them identify their gaps.
Set them up for success. Actually
stretch them. Create a safe space where
they can fail so that they give
themselves permission to try harder.
Those are all examples of ways where you
know you can really contribute. Most
often I just see a case of basically the
manager's role in this story was moving
papers from here to there. Yeah,
exactly. It sounds like it the the core
of what you're getting at is it's not
enough to just witness or or be around
for the change. You really need to prove
in the interview that you were
responsible and in some sense show the
insight or the behaviors that kind of
led to the outcomes that uh are at least
partially attributable to you. I'd love
to hear a couple more examples. Yeah.
All right. So, let's do conflict.
Conflict resolution. This is a really
common situation that most big companies
look for and also true for IC's, right?
Yeah. Yeah. It's the same and and and
this is exactly okay. What is different
for a manager role and if there's a
conflict between engineers on your team
or between you and someone else and you
resolve the conflict, well that's fine.
This is what the organization knows to
do. There are conflicts. Maybe you
escalate that. You resolve the conflict.
Maybe everyone's happy. But it's not as
interesting as if you create a change in
the performance of the organization. And
so this can be as you're doing that
you're also coaching and uplifting the
people who are involved in this so that
next time either they can resolve the
conflict on their own they don't need
you anymore or they can just avoid the
conflict altogether. Another common
example in conflicts is a situation like
there's a culture or a bad relationships
that are already existing between
different parts of the organization
between your team and another team and
then you leverage the situation of the
conflict as an opportunity to fix the
relationships so that after the conflict
is done not only is the conflict
resolved but those two different
organizations can collect collaborate
much in a much more healthy manner. So
those are two examples of creating
change and and really framing your
storytelling in the interview around
creating that change. I love that. Yeah,
I think I I chatted with someone the
other day and they they basically set up
their story by saying, "I joined an
organization. There was bad blood
between these two groups and it was
really obvious to me when I first
started and I knew I was going to need
to make a change here and so here's the
things that I did." And the nice thing
is it showed awareness. they were able
to show off all of the things that they
did and I didn't blame them for all of
the, you know, mistakes of their
predecessors. So, I think what you're
getting at is just really showing uh the
impact that you're able to have beyond
kind of manager 101, keep people from
punching each other in the office. Yeah,
exactly. Perfect. I I love generally
speaking the idea behind the things that
you're proposing here, but I worry in
some cases that candidates will get a
little bit fluffy. Like it it's easy to
talk about these things in the abstract,
but when it gets down to the details,
it's hard to express like how do you
show empathy in an interview or how do
you show that you were building culture
on your team? What is the trick to
getting these things across without
sounding overly fluffy? Yeah. And it's a
really interesting challenge. And in
these situations, I think it is really
helpful to be specific and to give
examples of what you actually did. So if
we look at the example of empathy for
example we can take you know the
conflict example and another common
scenario maybe for a bit more senior
managers is you're working on this
really high priority project maybe it
comes from the CEO or the CTO and you
just want to push it through but you
need to collaborate with other teams and
those teams may have different
priorities and so a common way of okay
how do I show empathy the incorrect way
is saying yeah I met with a manager from
the platform team and I needed their
support to get this project off the
ground and I used my empathy skills to
know what they're dealing with and
bottom line I had to escalate it was the
co priority and that's what we did and
so you're saying you did that but it
doesn't really come through an
alternative view where you don't even
use the word empathy can be something
like the same story. I met with the
other engineering manager and I realized
what their organization actually valued
and so I met with them and brainstormed
the way how we can frame the work that
matters to the CEO in a way that their
organization also values. And by doing
this creative brainstorming, we were
able to propose a slight change to the
goals where we could both meet our goals
and do work that our managers valued. So
here I didn't use the word empathy at
all. But the impact that I created as a
manager, I didn't need to involve my
leadership. I was able to create a
win-win situation instead of just
forcing a compromise and I improved
collaboration in the future. So that's a
way of talking about specifics about
what you actually did and the outcome of
that without even using the words
empathy. You can think that, but you
don't necessarily have to say that.
Yeah, I love that. And it it seems like
for many managers, they're so used to
kind of the basics that it just kind of
comes through in all of their actions.
And so in some ways just describing what
went down and what you did is sufficient
to kind of tell that story without you
resorting to you know some fluffy
language about uh you know what you
ought to do or what you should do in
that case. Yeah. And we could touch on
that a little bit because it it does
come up more in manager interviews than
in IC interviews. Behavioral interviews
specifically are all about tell me about
a time. When you get to manager
interviews, you often get questions like
tell me about your approach to one-on-
ones. And it's not really about tell me
about a time, it's what's your approach.
And in these cases, I do recommend to
talk about the frameworks, the models
that you have. I think this is really
important. I also think you should
really quickly tie to specific examples.
So, you want to kind of help the
interviewer get to that behavioral style
interview of talking about specifics.
Otherwise, I can think okay you have
this great framework of you know how do
I prioritize things but I have no
confidence that you can actually apply
it in practice especially when it's hard
to apply it when you have to make hard
decisions and tradeoffs. There you go.
One part of this is have you read the
book? Have you kind of put your thoughts
together? And then the other part is can
you actually put it into practice
especially when the rubber hits the
road. I think a lot of good management
is about what happens in those 10% of
cases where everyone's hair is on fire.
and the the ship is not in the right
direction. Maybe talking about a tension
here, I also see a lot of cases where
managers will struggle between kind of
the highle strategy uh which a lot of
managers like to dabble in and think is
important to their role coupled with the
low-level execution. These are the
things that you know my team needs to
get done in order to make their goals.
How do you recommend managers balance
the two of these things? How should they
think about how to come across in an
interview setting? So that's really
depends on the specific interview. Some
interviews would be more structured. For
example, meta has a manager project
retrospective. And then there's a
reasonable structure of when to go
broader, when to go deep, when to talk
strategy, when to talk tactics.
If it comes up in a different setting,
well, I generally recommend just
presenting the interviewer with a menu
of options. I like to call it the table
of contents version of the answer or the
10,000 over feet overview or the minimum
viable answer where you basically
present a highle overview without going
into any details of how do you approach
the specific situation where the
interviewer is asking about from
strategy and tactics. just give the the
headlines and then ask the interviewer,
"Where do you want me to dive in first?"
And when you frame it like that in an
interview setting, you're actually
accomplishing a couple of things. You're
subtly taking control of the interview.
Even if they won't go deep into one
specific section, it'll still open a
background thread. And so, their
follow-up questions will more likely go
in those directions. And so, you're kind
of getting more agency in the actual
interview. you're also planting seeds in
the interviewer's mind that there are
all these things that you are willing to
talk about. And so if you won't have
time to go over all of that, the
interviewer will still unconsciously
even think that yeah, like Gilead was
willing to talk about those things and I
probed him in two others. And so I have
some confidence that had I probed in
those areas, it would also be fine. And
the last thing that you're accomplishing
here is you're helping the interviewer
help you. You're helping the interviewer
help you navigate the discussion. And so
on these strategy versus tactics, what I
recommend is think about having a
dialogue and continuous discussion with
the interviewer to help the interviewer
help you navigate on what they actually
care about in that specific interview.
Love it. I think that table of contents
is super useful, at least in in my
experience in uh interviewing managers.
You'll occasionally kind of touch on
something that seems like a skeleton in
the closet and the candidate is kind of
dancing around it. And if you don't get
a chance to dive into it, then you're
left with this lingering thought. They
they have something there that I wasn't
able to touch on or they lack some skill
there. But if on the other hand, they
start the response by saying, you know,
here's all the places that I'm happy to
go into, it's hard for me to leave with
the impression that, you know, I
couldn't have gone down, you know, door
A. This is this is super cool. I I'd
actually love to take a maybe more
negative posture here and talk a little
bit about red flags. I I I don't want to
fixate on them too much because in a lot
of cases it's it's more important that
you you really think about what you're
trying to get across and how you're
hoping to present yourself as a manager,
but are there red flags that you see
come across more frequently in manager
interviews that people should steer
clear of and and try to avoid? Yeah. So
there the the typical red flags that I
don't think are worth, you know, talking
about here around, you know, biases and
so forth. Then there are specific
company culture uh red flags that I'll
touch on really briefly like we talked
about conflict resolution.
How to actually resolve conflict
correctly quote unquote is different for
different companies. You know it could
look different between Amazon and Block
for an example. And so if you really are
doubling down on one style which is
completely at odds with the company
you're interviewing for, that may be a
kind of slight red flag. Other than
that, I I think the most common red
flags I see are all about people who
don't think about creating that uh
positive and sustainable change. as an
example looking at you know managing a
low performer again with the quotes
often times maybe too often candidates
will talk about a new hire and when
someone talks about a low performer
who's a new hireer I immediately have a
lot of questions going on in my mind as
an interviewer I'm wondering who's the
low performer here basically that's the
question I have is it the manager that
did not set up a new person for success
maybe they set them up for failure.
Maybe the hiring process did not go
well. And so just choosing that story, I
already have a lot of questions. And if
the manager doesn't have a good answer
for that, then I would consider that a
negative flag. I wouldn't say it's
necessarily a red flag, but it would
definitely be a negative.
No, it's a great response. And I I think
that is an underrated aspect of manager
interviews is that your interviewer has
their own perception about how certain
situations should unfold or the the
problems that are are likely to occur.
And if the candidate either realizes
them late or makes them the climax of
their story, but it turns out that hey,
I we we knew this was going to happen.
You were running a migration project.
Surely you should have anticipated that
you're going to discover some scope late
in the the game that you're going to
need to solve. um these can come across
as as really I guess more junior uh of a
manager that maybe you you weren't even
anticipating these problems or maybe
you're the underperformer in those
cases. Yeah. So I think avoiding those
is super helpful. What would you suggest
for managers who maybe aren't sure
whether you know what they're about to
say is going to come across with a foot
in their mouth or or be judged by the
interviewer as as negative. So I think
here prep it's mostly about preparation.
the the more you can prepare ahead of
time, the better you will do. I think
90% of the effort should go to choosing
the stories, creating that hashmap of
these are the stories for the common
situations like low performer, hiring,
conflict, uh you know, prioritization,
hard tradeoffs, and choosing one to two
stories ahead of time that are really
strong. By offloading, by precomputing
as much as possible, you do yourself
service of, you know, being in the best
possible spot when you get those tough
questions. And then if you do get a
question that doesn't neatly map to one
of your prepared stories, often times
you can subtly propose a pivot, propose
to actually use one of your prepared
stories. A a common example here is you
know tell me about a time you made a
mistake or tell me about some
constructive feedback. Most companies
actually look for growth. They look for
someone who is continuously growing and
really looks at how can I improve in
each situation. They don't really care
as much about the actual mistake but
what you did afterwards. Did you own up
to that? Did you do an internal
retrospective? How did you change? what
is your kind of before and after picture
from the previous analogy after this
situation. And so if your most, you
know, impactful personal growth story
didn't start with act necessarily making
a clear mistake, you can propose a pivot
to the story to the interviewer by
saying something along the lines of,
"Hey, I've certainly made a lot of
mistakes. Is it fine if I tell you about
it about about some growth that was
really influential in my managerial
career? And by proposing that you're
giving the interviewer what they
actually care about while still
leveraging the premputee that you've
done ahead of time. And so you don't
really need to face as much of the
pressure of trying to come up with a
story on the fly. Yeah, it's a good
point. I think a lot of people kind of
neglect that that facet. they feel like
got a question I need to answer it as
literally and directly as possible. But
the reality is generally speaking even
in conversation people don't respond in
such a way and and interviews are no
different. So having that uh that
hashmap I think is quite useful. Um I I
want to talk a little bit about you know
some specific situations that are are
kind of interesting and I'd love to
start with new managers. I think people
make the transition to manager all the
time. Some will actually go back to
being an IC. oftentimes they're
sponsored by the organization that
they're a part of. It's basically, you
know, we think you'd make a good
manager, but like let's just prove it
out. And as a result, when they go
looking for a job, there's usually this
weird position where they don't have
enough experience to really prove out
how effective they've been as a manager
um and uh they're hoping to leave the
company that's kind of incubated them.
When you think about new managers and
their preparation, do you have any
advice or or things that you think that
they should avoid as they're preparing
for these manager loops? Too often, you
know, if you switch transition
internally, often you are the best
engineer. Most companies would take the
best engineer and lose them in exchange
for a newish mediocre manager. That's
the reality of how most people get
started. We most of us did not go to
school to learn management. And so
you're starting with this really
challenging situation and so understand
what is it that managers actually do and
then spend the bulk of the time really
trying to come up with those situations.
Now some companies would be more uh
detailed oriented and really drilled
deep to make sure you're talking about
actual situations you live through. And
in those cases, it's going to be really
hard if you don't do that preparation
work. And I highly recommend just find
the best example that you actually have
that you actually live through. And
depending on how much time you have,
that may actually point to a personal
growth area that you may want to
actually focus on over the next coming
weeks in your actual job to gain some
real experience there. Yeah, I think
that's a great point. and kind of
leaning into that preparation and
thinking about what are the things that
I I need to have ready is actually a
somewhat useful way to think about your
current job and like what are those
things that I probably ought to be
doing. I wanted to add just one quick
comment on this one that sometimes
managers will get out in front of their
skis. They'll try to be the five-year
experienced manager when they've clearly
got one year of experience. And it it
can make sense in the sense that you are
competing with experienced managers in
some cases. But for a lot of companies
when they're hiring uh you know new
talent, they have someone specific in
mind and sometimes they might have a new
org that they need a bit of a TLM,
someone who's going to be a tech lead
and a manager who's going to grow into
the position. And if you're
disqualifying yourself for the
experienced manager because you don't
really have any substance while
simultaneously kind of edging yourself
out of that earlier um uh role job,
you're you're probably not serving
yourself well. So make sure you come
across as authentic. You're you're kind
of trying to present the the best side
of yourself, but you don't want to be
someone that you're not yet at least. Uh
it doesn't serve you very well. I want
to talk about the flip side. So there is
just so many people I think who I've
been working at Microsoft for 10 years
have been very successful. They've
treated me very well. You know obviously
I've been here for a while. Um and now
you know I want to go make the switch. I
want to go join uh Google or I want to
go join Meta. What should these seasoned
managers kind of anticipate? What are
the objections that that hiring
committees are typically looking at?
Yeah. So the biggest concern companies
would have is the signal we mentioned a
few minutes ago which is that continuous
growth. As an example, you know, I spent
nine years at a single company and then
my role kept changing from an engineer
to supporting several teams. And so
there's a clear growth trajectory there.
And so if you're nine years in a in a
the same company, the question is can
you point to a clear growth trajectory
that you had there? Now for some people
there isn't an externally visible
trajectory that is you know clearly
communicated in their resume and so as
an interviewer when I get into that
again I'm starting with a question mark
and so the best thing you can do is
address it headon there's an elephant in
the room and you need to address it and
so that's I believe the biggest hurdle
you have
to overcome if like there are no
promotions
That's fine. Many companies have a
terminal promotion level, especially for
managers. You're not necessarily
expected to get to senior manager, but
companies are looking for people who
continuously grow. And so, you have to
prepare a story. It's all about
storytelling. You need to have a clear
narrative of how you grew during this
period. When you were ex at least
externally, it appears as if you were
static. And that can be you know
switching from you know supporting
platform teams to maybe supporting AI
teams. That's one dimension of growth.
It can be switching from a more back-end
role to a more product oriented roles.
So you have to come up with your own
story your own narrative of how you
still grew in within that time frame.
And the main message the takeaway you
want the interviewer to take is hey I'm
Gilad. I may have not been promoted in
these nine years, but I am always
looking to grow and improve, even if
that doesn't mean a promotion. So, I
think that's the biggest thing that more
experienced candidates that have been in
the same role for a long time, that's
the thing they should prepare for. I
love that. Yeah, the challenge
orientation, I think, is actually useful
across behavioral interviews. And it's
kind of like, show me that you haven't
um kind of been static. Uh that way I
know when you're going to make this big
shift into a new company uh that you're
not going to be caught flatfooted
because you've been doing it. You've
been adapting to new circumstances all
the time. I wanted to add one more that
I always see and it's managers who fall
back to kind of how their company does
things. So at Microsoft this is how we
do things or here's the process that I
follow. And while it's true in a company
you have to follow the process, in a lot
of cases what interviewers are looking
for is that you have something that you
bring to the table. You know, I actually
think we should do it this way, but my
company made me do it this way. Here's
how I adapted. Um, in those
circumstances, what they're hearing is,
okay, uh, Jim or Jane has been working
at Microsoft for a while, but they can
come into my company and I think they're
going to be a great fit. I think we
actually have a culture that better
aligns with with how they are set up.
Uh, so avoiding those potholes can be
really useful, especially if the the
tenure is pretty high. Yeah. Awesome.
Um, Gilad, I' I'd love to talk to you a
little bit about some higher level
questions. I I think, you know,
generally speaking, you mentioned this
earlier, but the EM kind of field has
changed a lot with Zer winding down and
with AI moving. I want to hear your
opinion. Should managers expect to field
technical rounds in their interviews? Is
this something that that you feel like
people should be preparing uh for? So I
I think in 2025 100%. And I think just
because companies can afford to have a
higher hiring bar. I recommend you know
managers get into the habit of being
technical and staying technical uh
throughout their careers. And the
example I like to share recently is
actually Amazon's CTO who shared a
recent post about writing an AI tool to
help him have meetings with his office
of the CTO. And that's an example of the
CTO of a company with tens of thousands
of engineers being hands-on and coding.
And I think every manager should figure
out how they can stay technical in their
role. So that's a general statement
about you know engineering management in
general in the context of interviewing.
Yes, you need to prepare for technical
interviews including coding including
system design and different companies
would have different expectations
especially around coding and system
design. There are different level
expectations when comparing to the
comparable IC ladder. But at the end of
the day, you need to show that you can
really support engineers that you can
build empathy that you can understand
what they are going through and a lot of
management is filling in is being
whatever the team needs you to be. If
there's no product manager, you need to
step into that role. If the team doesn't
have a tech lead, you need to step into
that role. And so you need to show that
you have those capabilities. So I
definitely say yes, managers should
prepare for coding system design
interviews.
And now after I've said all of that, I
will say a mistake I see too many
managers make is actually spending too
much time preparing for the coding and
system design just because they're
really nervous about that because that's
not part of their routine. So you should
really time box that. But you should
definitely still do it. Yeah, that's a
great point. I've definitely talked with
a bunch of managers who've done 200 300
lead code questions and it's kind of
like they're probably not actually
assessing you in that way. I know at
Meta they had a rusty coder standard.
So, they were really anticipating that
managers wouldn't be all that effective
at coding. I also see, and I'd love to
get your opinion on this, managers who
say, "I've spent the last four years
really honing my leadership and
organizational capabilities. I know my
my technical skills have atrophied. I'm
actually going to self- select out. I'm
going to go look for companies that are
only interviewing for those things that
I think I'm really good at. Do you think
this is a good idea? Do you think people
ought to kind of constrain themselves
and then move around or do you think,
you know, generally speaking, that
people should just put in the reps and
and bring those skills back up to speed?
So, first of all, if you're really
really good and really exceptional, when
you constrain yourself, you're more
likely to find something within those
constraints. And so if the reason that
you're constraining is when you look
honestly at yourself, at your
motivation, if you're putting those
constraints really because you're really
looking to double down on this area to
find companies that really value that,
that may be the right call. However, I
think in most cases, if you're really
honest with yourself, you're putting
those constraints out of fear. out of
fear that you know you have atrophied in
these other areas and it's fine if you
want to double down and focus on these
areas. That should not necessarily
excuse you from ramping up on areas that
you've already learned in the past in
your career and kind of refreshing your
memory and data structures and
algorithms and coding. And so I would
recommend for most people that it's
worth the investment to ramp up on these
areas that you knew in the past and not
necessarily constrain yourself on those
grounds at least. Yeah, I like it. And
that fear motivation I think is
pervasive. It's actually worthwhile I
think especially at career transitions
which are tumultuous in nature. you get
some friends who will actually give it
to you straight and say, "Yeah, Gilad,
it seems like you're running away from,
you know, what you're actually really
good at. Are you sure you want to do
that?" Or maybe you got to put in the
the effort here. Uh it can be such a
challenging uh environment to make a
decision about your career because in a
lot of times people are choosing to move
jobs in part because they don't like the
previous job they were in. Uh and so
sometimes there's some biases that creep
in there as well. Just real quick on a
similar situation that I've seen happen
several times. It it's similar. It's not
exactly the same. Many managers enjoy
management and as you mentioned many
managers also transition back to being
an IC. And I've seen some people and I
was myself guilty of this of trying to
use a job hop as an opportunity to
transition from EM to IC or vice versa.
And I would generally recommend against
that. You want to have those stories
that are fresh in your memory, that are
aligned with what you've done recently,
that's up to date and make that
transition within your current job
family and then transition, you know, a
year afterwards internally. That is just
a much healthier uh uh setup that will
set you up for success. Trying to do
both a new company and a new job family
is just setting yourself up for failure.
Agreed. There are probably some
situations where that's the only option
that's available, but go exhaust those
other options before you, you know, make
your job twice as hard. Uh, and
something that's already pretty
stressful. Hard agree on that one. Well,
Gilad, I really appreciate your time. I
I learned a lot here. I feel like you
gave us some good frameworks on how we
think about manager interviews as kind
of emphasizing that leveling up. um how
we can get into the details and be
concrete while also being able to talk
about frameworks and abstractions and
also some practical advice about you
know flags to avoid and and ways that
managers ought to think about preparing
for their interviews. I wanted to do a
quick pitch for Gilad. He's got a
Substack coming up. I'll include it in
the description. I he has a lot of great
thoughts on management and uh if you are
an experienced manager, you've probably
would benefit from some of his wisdom.
Also, if you want to work with folks
like Elon um on a kind of an interview
prep basis on Hello Interview, we have
mock interviews with a lot of
experienced managers who can kind of
help you craft your stories and and work
through some of these difficulties. So,
um Gilad, really appreciate all of your
time and um uh thanks for coming on the
channel. Yeah, it was a pleasure.